Blog post about new hash table (#195)
valkey-io/valkey-io.github.io: content/blog/2025-03-20-new-hash-table.md

+++
title= "A new hash table"
date= 2025-03-20 00:00:00
description= "Designing a state-of-the art hash table implementation"

> authors= [ "zuiderkwast", "SoftlyRaining"]

Reviewer: Yall need author pages, or it won't render correctly.

+++

> Valkey is essentially a giant hash table attached to the network. A hash table

Reviewer: Probably want a better hook. We can talk about how many caching workloads are bound on storing data, so being able to to store more data allows you to reduce the size of your clusters.

is the data structure that maps keys to values. When optimizing for latency, CPU
and memory usage, it's natural to look at the hash table internals. By replacing
the hash table with a different implementation, we have managed to reduce the
memory usage by roughly 20 bytes per key-value pair and improve the latency and
CPU usage by rougly 10% for instances without I/O threading.

> Results

Reviewer: A typical blog would leave the results till the end, and talk about the constraints up front.

Author: Just move the Results section to the end?

I'll keep brief text in the abstract above *"we have managed to reduce the memory usage by roughly 20 bytes per key-value pair and improve the latency and CPU usage by rougly 10% for instances without I/O threading"*?

-------

Memory usage for keys of length N and value of length M bytes. TBD.

| Version    | Memory usage per key   |
|------------|------------------------|
| Valkey 7.2 | ? bytes                |
| Valkey 8.0 | ? bytes                |
| Valkey 8.1 | ? bytes                |

> 

Reviewer: @SoftlyRaining Are you working on generating these numbers?

> The benchmarks below were run using a key size of N and a value size of M bytes, without pipelining.

Reviewer 2: Let's add something for set/zset/hash and see if we get even more performance and memory savings since those datatypes are hashtables inside of a hashtable. :)

Author: Yes... Feel free to replace these tables with some completely different tests.

There's a fixed overhead for the key and then per field-value. Still I'd like to see a table of memory savings per element/field/etc. for these types.

I want to do hash value embedding (to save the value pointer and an extra allocation) and Ran noticed that our embedded sds (key and field) are sds8 even when they should be sds5, so we could save a two more bytes for those. That's because they're copied from an EMBSTR robj value and those are always sds8. I have some idea to fix that too though.

| Command                 | Valkey 7.2 | Valkey 8.0 | Valkey 8.1 |
|-------------------------|------------|------------|------------|
| SET                     | Xµs, Y QPS | ?          | ?          |
| GET                     | Xµs, Y QPS | ?          | ?          |
| ...                     | ...        | ?          | ?          |

The benchmark was run on an xxxx using yyyy, without I/O threads.

Background
----------

The slowest operation when looking up a key-value pair is by far reading from
the main RAM memory. A key point when optimizing a hash table is therefore to
make sure we have as few memory accesses as possible. Ideally, the memory
reading is already in the CPU cache, which is much faster memory that belong to

> the CPU.

Reviewer: I think this background is OK, but I think it would be beneficial to show the previous implementation, and then explain how we iterated on it to the new one. Then it becomes easier to show the memory accesses that are getting removed. You already show the previous design later on, so we can probably move it earlier.

A good general framing is, show the current state (the dict), highlight the gaps (lots of memory accesses and allocations), introduce a new concept that solves that (cache friendly), then discuss the solution. Most of that content is here, just needs a little bit of moving around.

When optimizing for memory usage, we also want to minimize the number of
allocation and pointers between them, because a pointer is 8 bytes in a 64-bit
system. If we save one pointer per key-value pair, for 100 million keys that's
almost a gigabyte.

When a computer loads some data from the main memory into the CPU cache, it does
so in blocks of one cache line. The cache-line size is 64 bytes on almost all

> modern hardware. Recent work on hash tables, such as "Swiss tables", are highly

Reviewer: Should probably link the swiss table design notes or youtube video here.

> modern hardware. Recent work on hash tables, such as "Swiss tables", are highly
> optimized for cache lines. When looking up a key, if it's not found where you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modern hardware. Recent work on hash tables, such as "Swiss tables", are highly
optimized to store and access data within a single cache line. When looking up a key, if it's not found where you
```

> first look for it (due to a hash collission), then it should ideally be found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
first look for it (due to a hash collision), then it should ideally be found
```
First introduction of concepts such as hash collisions. I mentioned earlier it would be helpful to give an overview of the current design, probably can walk through these concepts.

Author: Yeah, it's hard to know how much of computer science lecture we have to give. We'll have to assume some basic knowledge of what a hash table is, right?

within the same cache line. If it is, then it can be found very fast once this
cache line has been loaded into the CPU cache.

Required features
-----------------

Why not use an open-source state-of-the-art hash table implementation such as
Swiss tables? The answer is that we require some specific features, apart from

> the basic operations like add, lookup, replace, delete:

Reviewer 2: Another reason: Swiss table is very fast, but it stores the elements directly in a contiguous array, which requires that the elements all be the same size. Because our elements vary in size, we had to choose a different design - we chose cache-line sized buckets with element pointers. (This idea was mentioned at the end of the swiss table talk - up to you if you want to make that reference though.)

Author: No, you can store pointers in a Swiss table, just like how we store pointers in our bucket layout. The pointers are the fixed-size elements, no?

I don't think it allows a custom key-value entry design like we do though. It can be either a set or a map (key and value) IIUC.

Author: I think we could have picked an off-the-shelf implementation even if we couldn't embed key and value the way we do, as long as would be better than dict. It's good to use a battle-tested ready-to-use one too. It's easier to get it right, and less work... I think scan and incremental rehashing were clearly blockers though.

                                   v               +-------------------+
                             +-----------+
                             | dictEntry |
                             +-----------+
                             |    key    |
                             |   value   |
                             |   next    |
                             +-----|-----+
                                   |
                                   v
                                  ...
```

The dict has two tables, called "table 0" and "table 1". Usually only one
exists, but both are used when incremental rehashing is in progress.

It is a chained hash table, so if multiple keys are hashed to the same slot in
the table, their key-value entries form a linked list. That's what the "next"
pointer in the dictEntry is for.

To lookup a key "FOO" and access the value "BAR", Valkey still had to read from
memory four times. If there is a hash collission, it has to follow two more
pointers for each hash collission and thus read twice more from memory (the key
and the next pointer).

In Valkey 8.0, an optimization was made to embed the key ("FOO" in the drawing

> above) in the dictEntry, eliminating one pointer and one memory access.

Reviewer: We have a full blog post dedicated to embedding the key, so let's just start with the state of the world in 7.2.

Design
------

In the new hash table designed for Valkey 8.1, the table consists of buckets of
64 bytes, one cache line. Each bucket can store up to seven elements. Keys that
map to the same bucket are all stored in the same bucket. The bucket also has a

> metadata section which contains a one byte secondary hash for each key. This is

Reviewer: Need to explain a bit about what the secondary hash is doing here, it's not really explained what it is or how it solve hash collisions.

I'm not sure we did any testing, but this is also really good for caching workloads, since we save a memory access most of the time when there is a cache miss. A common cache hit rate is like 80%, so that 20% gets a nice speed boost as well.

| table 0  -------->| m x x x x x x x | m x x x x x x x | m x x x x x x x | ...
| table 1   |       +-----------------+-----|-----------+-----------------+-----
+-----------+                               |
                                            v
                               +------------------------+
                               | serverObject           |
                               +------------------------+
                               | type, encoding,        |
                               | ref-counter, etc.      |
                               | "FOO" (embedded key)   |
                               | "BAR" (embedded value) |
                               +------------------------+
```

Assuming the hashtable and the table are already in the CPU cache, looking up
key-value entry now requires only two memory lookups: The bucket and the
serverObject. If there is a hash collission, the object we're looking for is
most likely in the same bucket, so no extra memory access is required.

If a bucket becomes full, the last element slots in the bucket is replaced by a
pointer to a child bucket. A child bucket has the same layout as a regular

> bucket, but it's a separate allocation. Child buckets form a chain. There is
> some probability of this happening, but long chains are very rare. Most of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bucket, but it's a separate allocation. The length of these bucket chains are not bounded, but long chains are very rare as long as keys are well distributed by the hashing function. Most of the
```

The, "there is some probability" just seems weird to me.

Author: Thanks. I'll take this with some line breaks. (I don't like long lines. :laughing:)

```suggestion
bucket, but it's a separate allocation. The length of these bucket chains are
not bounded, but long chains are very rare as long as keys are well distributed
by the hashing function. Most of the
```

```
+-----------+
| hashtable |        bucket            bucket            bucket
+-----------+       +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----
| table 0  -------->| m x x x x x x x | m x x x x x x c | m x x x x x x x | ...
| table 1   |       +-----------------+---------------|-+-----------------+-----
+-----------+                                         |
                                        Child bucket  v
                                       +-----------------+
                                       | m x x x x x x c |
                                       +---------------|-+
                                                       |
                                         Child bucket  v
                                        +-----------------+
                                        | m x x x x x x x |
                                        +-----------------+
```

Hashes, sets and sorted sets
----------------------------

The nested data types Hashes, Sets and Sorted sets also make use of the new hash
table. The memory usage is reduced by roughly 10-20 bytes per entry. Memory and
latency/throughput results are WIP.

Iterator prefetching

> --------------------

Reviewer: This is technically a separate point. It addresses some of the content of the blog, but ultimately feels a bit random at the end. Maybe we drop it and write another followup blog on memory prefetching?

Author: We could include it in the 8.1 overview blog post. I'm not sure anyone wants to write a prefetching blog post specifically.
